   
Contact
www.linkedin.com/in/akhil-
garg-77a525139  (LinkedIn)
Top Skills
Topology
Charging Systems
Finite Element Analysis (FEA)Akhil Garg
Director of Battery Design & Analysis Lab (BDAL)
Wuhan, Hubei, China
Summary
I am Dr. Akhil Garg, is currently working as an Associate Professor
at School of Chemistry and Materials Science at Xi'an Jiatong-
Liverpool University at Suzhou, China (near Shanghai). This is
a joint UK-China Inititative to establish a campus. Previously, he
had worked at Mechanical Science and Engineering at Huazhong
University of Science and Technology (HUST), China. He also taught
course on “Battery failures” at China-European Union (EU) Institute
of Cleaner and Renewable energy at HUST. He is also external
advisory board member of BatCAT Project (about batteries) funded
by EU..
I did PhD Studies and Post doctorate from Nanyang Technological
University (NTU), Singapore.
Research and Teaching background:
My current research areas include Thermal management of
batteries; Multiphysics modelling; Topology design optimization for
battery cooling plates design; Digital twins for EV batteries states
estimation; Fast charging protocols optimization
I am Associate Editor of ASME Journal of Electrochemical Energy
Conversion and Storage; International Journal of Green energy;
International Journal of Ambient Energy. I am PI of an energy
storage project sponsored by Queen Mary University of London and
my University.
During my post-PhD experience, I have taught the following courses:
(1) Engineering of Electric vehicles (EVs)
(2) Batteries for EVs:
Multidisciplinary Perspective
(3) Renewable Energy and New Energy
Technologies
(4) Energy Storage Systems
  Page 1 of 5

   
(5) Battery Management systems
(6) Intelligent Energy Systems
(7) Heat transfer
Experience
Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Associate Professor
June 2025 - Present  (4 months)
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China
Dr. Akhil Garg is currently working as an Associate Professor at School of
Chemistry and Materials Science at XJTLU. Previously, he had worked at
Mechanical Science and Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and
Technology (HUST), China and Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi.
He also taught course on “Battery failures” at China-European Union (EU)
Institute of Cleaner and Renewable energy at HUST. He is also external
advisory board member of BatCAT Project (about batteries) funded by EU. His
PhD is from School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. During his PhD, he has worked jointly
with Aerospace Industry, Rolls-Royce (UK), Singapore for 2 years on Artificial
Intelligence and Robust Design optimization from the year 2010-2012. His
main research interests includes Machine learning for battery synthesis;
Genetic programming; AI-driven Topology optimization for cleaner energy; He
has been listed in Stanford Elsevier World's Top 2% Scientists List for the last
2 years. He has experience of presiding over the Hubei NSFC (2023-2025)
project on deep learning-driven topology optimization for battery cold plate
design; Guangdong talent project (2016-2019); International academic project
jointly with Queen Mary University of London (2022-2023) and St. Petersburg
State University of Russia (2023-2024). He has published over 100 peer
reviewed articles in this field and have scopus H-index of 47. 
Link to my webpage profile: https://scholar.xjtlu.edu.cn/en/persons/AkhilGarg
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2 years 4 months
Director of Battery Design & Analysis Lab (BDAL)
June 2023 - Present  (2 years 4 months)
  Page 2 of 5

   
China
Leading the Battery Design & Analysis Lab (BDAL) at Huazhong University of
Science and Technology. I am managing the team of 20 students from multi-
diverse backgrounds from China, Russia, India (IITs; NITs; etc.), Malaysia,
Vietnam, and Bangladesh etc. in the following directions:
(1) Real-time thermal management of battery packs in Electric Vehicles:
Suppose, we are given with Industry problem where battery is already fitted
in Electric car, how do we optimize the thermal management in real-time. Our
team had specifically designed the AI-driven hardware monitoring system
using reinforcement learning and controller design to efficiently monitor and
optimize the flow rate parameters with time to maintain the temperature and
temperature variations in the battery pack in the normal range.
(2) Topology optimization of Battery packs cooling plates:
Our team has been working with eminent industry partners to structurally
design the entire Battery pack cooling plates (traditionally rectangular plates
were used) so as to maximize the heat transfer rate, reduce pressure drop,
reduce the weight, etc. 
(3) Adaptive and Optimal fast charging technologies for improved battery life:
Usually, the battery life decreases using fast charging methods as it increases
heat generation rate. We had specifically designed a novel health-aware
battery fast charging method that considers battery aging also while optimizing
the charging protocols (CC-CV switch over point) in real-time.
(4) Reusability of spent battery packs by intelligent identification and sorting
of cells using robotics-based AI approach designed using non-destructive
physics-based measurements:
Our team is working on research problem to identify those cells in the spent
batteries and estimate the remaining useful life using robotics-based-AI
approach designed on non-destructive physics-based measurements.
Associate Professor
June 2023 - May 2025  (2 years)
Hubei, China
My current research areas include Thermal management of batteries;
Multiphysics modelling; Topology design optimization for battery cooling plates
  Page 3 of 5

   
design; Digital twins for EV batteries states estimation; Fast charging protocols
optimization
I am Associate Editor of ASME Journal of Electrochemical Energy Conversion
and Storage; International Journal of Green energy; International Journal of
Ambient Energy. I am PI of an energy storage project sponsored by Queen
Mary University of London and my University.
During my post-PhD experience, I have taught the following courses:
(1) Engineering of Electric vehicles (EVs)
(2) Batteries for EVs:
Multidisciplinary Perspective
(3) Renewable Energy and New Energy
Technologies
(4) Energy Storage Systems
(5) Battery Management systems
(6) Intelligent Energy Systems
(7) Heat transfer
Akhil Garg
Associate Professor
China-EU Institute of Cleaner and Renewable Energy
School of Mechanical Science and Engineering
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST)
Email: akhil.garg@xjtlu.edu.cn
Academic page link: http://english.mse.hust.edu.cn/info/1090/2192.htm
Associate editor of the ASME Journal of Electrochemical Energy Conversion
and Storage (ASME Scientific Citation Index (SCI)).
Google link: https://scholar.google.com/citations?
user=51TMv_AAAAAJ&hl=en&authuser=1
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Assistant Professor
May 2020 - March 2023  (2 years 11 months)
New Delhi, Delhi, India
汕头大学
Associate Professor
March 2016 - July 2019  (3 years 5 months)
  Page 4 of 5

   
Education
Nanyang Technological University Singapore
Doctoral degree, Mechanical Engineering  · (August 2010 - March 2015)
  Page 5 of 5

